                            Tetrinet for Linux
                            ------------------
                  by Andrew Church <achurch@achurch.org>
                      and Petr Baudis <pasky@ucw.cz>

                               Version 0.11


For general information on Tetrinet, consult the file tetrinet.txt (the
text file distributed with the original Windows version).

The following notes apply to the Linux version of Tetrinet:


Distribution/license information
--------------------------------
This program is public domain, and may be modified and distributed without
limitation.


Requirements
------------
You must be using a 50-line text display to run this version of Tetrinet;
Xwindows is not yet supported.  One option is to open an xterm window in
Xwindows and resize it to be 50 lines high.  The other option (recommended)
is to use a 50-line text console.

To get a 50-line text console, if you use LILO to boot, add the following
line to the top of your /etc/lilo.conf file:

vga = extended

run /sbin/lilo, and reboot.  If you use a boot disk without LILO, insert it
into your floppy drive, give the following command:

rdev -v /dev/fd0 -2

and reboot.

Another option is to use the SVGATextMode program, available on Sunsite
({http,ftp}://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/Linux/) and other places, to switch your
console to 50-line mode without rebooting.  You may also use that program
to set up a larger display (for example, I use 100x60); Tetrinet will
detect this and rearrange the display to make the best use of the available
space.


Compilation
-----------
Type "make".  This will generate two programs: "tetrinet" and
"tetrinet-server".  The former is the main program; the latter is a
standalone server.

It is recommended to have a brief look at the start of Makefile, it may
contain some rather obscure but potentially invaluable compilation
switches. It might not be necessary to change anything there at all, but
it is good to be aware of the switches' existence.


Starting the client
-------------------
Tetrinet requires two command-line arguments: your nickname and the server
to connect to, in that order.  For example:

	tetrinet MyNick tetrinet.somerandom.net

Tetrinet will function only as long as it remains connected to the server;
there is no "Client Settings" option as in the Windows version.  This may
be remedied in a future version.

You can also give Tetrinet any of the following options:

	-fancy       Use "fancy" TTY graphics.  (Note that this will slow
	             down redraws somewhat.)

	-fast        Use the "tetrifast" mode to connect to the server.
	             This mode eliminates the delay before a new cube
	             appears, thus speeding the game up noticeably. This
	             mode is incompatible with the classic mode and the
	             server has to support it. If in doubt, ask the other
	             players.

	-log <file>  Log network traffic to the given file.  All lines
	             start with an absolute time (seconds) in brackets.
	             Lines sent from the client to the server are prefixed
	             with ">>>", and lines from the server to the client
	             are prefixed with "<<<".  This could be used with a
	             utility program to replay a game later on (though such
	             a program is not currently included in the Tetrinet
	             distribution.)

        -noshadow    Do not make pieces cast "shadows" when they are slowly
                     falling.  (Normally the area under piece is filled by
                     dim dots to help to determine where the piece would hit
                     the ground if one would press the spacebar.)

	-noslide     Do not allow pieces to "slide" after being dropped
	             with the spacebar.  (Normally, there is a short time
	             after pressing the spacebar during which a piece can
	             "slide" left or right before it solidifies.)

	-slide       Opposite of -noslide; allows pieces to "slide" after
	             being dropped.  If both -slide and -noslide are given,
	             -slide takes precedence.  If both -windows and -slide
	             are given, this overrides the "no sliding" part of
	             -windows without affecting the other changes in
	             program behavior.

        -shadow      Opposite of -noshadow; makes pieces cast "shadows".

	-windows     Behave as much like the Windows version of Tetrinet as
	             possible.  (See "Differences from Windows Tetrinet".)
	             Implies -noslide and -noshadow.


Starting the server
-------------------
There are two ways to start the Tetrinet server.  One way is to give the
"-server" option to the Tetrinet program:

	tetrinet -server

Note that this is the deprecated way and support for this may be removed in
the future releases. You must also explicitly enable it in the Makefile during
compilation.

The other is to run the "tetrinet-server" program.  Both of these are
exactly equivalent.  The server can be stopped with ^C or a "kill" command.

If you want the server to run in the background, use an "&" after the
command, for example:

	tetrinet -server &


Configuring the server
----------------------
The server is configured via the ".tetrinet" file in your home directory.
This contains all the settings for the server in a simple format.  The
following is a sample .tetrinet file:

	winlist Alcan;0;3;1 AndrewK;0;2;1
	classic 1
	initiallevel 1
	linesperlevel 2
	levelinc 1
	averagelevels 1
	speciallines 1
	specialcount 1
	specialcapacity 18
	pieces 14 14 15 14 14 14 15
	specials 18 18 3 12 0 16 3 12 18
	linuxmode 0
	ipv6_only 0

Note that this file is automatically re-written at the end of a game or
when the server is terminated.  If you want to modify parameters for a
running server, send the server a HUP signal, using the command:

	kill -HUP <pid-of-server>

where <pid-of-server> is the process ID of the server.  A simpler
alternative is:

	killall -HUP tetrinet-server

Three of the configuration lines require special explanation.  The winlist
line is, as its name suggests, the winlist for the server; each parameter
contains four semicolon-separated fields:
	name ; team ; points ; games
"team" is a flag which is either 1 if the entry is for a team or 0 if the
entry is for a player.  "points" is just the number of points for the
player (see the main Tetrinet documentation); "games" is the number of
games in which that player has participated since getting on the winlist.

The pieces line contains percentage frequencies for each type of piece.
The order is: bar, square, reverse-L (green), L (purple), Z (red),
S (blue), and T.

The specials line, likewise, contains percentage frequencies for each type
of special.  The order is:  A, C, N, R, S, B, G, Q, O.

The "linuxmode" setting selects whether the client should try to remain
compatible with Windows clients.  This only affects the winlist display; if
linuxmode is set to 1, the server will send the number of games played by
each player as well as points won.  This is set to zero by default.

If the "ipv6_only" setting is set to a nonzero value, the server will only
listen for IPv6 connections; if zero (default), the server will listen on
both IPv4 and IPv6 if possible.


Keys
----
The display mode can be selected by one of the following keys:

	F1          Show Fields
	F2          Partyline
	F3          Winlist

F10 can be used to quit at any time.

In Partyline mode, the following commands are available.  To use a command,
simply type the command and arguments into the Partyline input buffer and
press Return (just like IRC).

	/team [name]  Set your team name.  If a name is not given, play
	                  alone.
	/start        Start a game (if you are the first player on the
	                  server).
	/stop, /end   Stop the game currently in progress (either command
	                  may be used).
	/pause        Pause the game.
	/unpause      Unpause the game.
	/             Quote a following slash, for example:
	                  "/ /start starts a game."

The following keys are used for controls on the "Show Fields" screen:

	Up, X       Rotate piece clockwise
	Z           Rotate piece counterclockwise
	Left        Move piece left
	Right       Move piece right
	Down        Accelerate piece downward
	Space       Drop piece (note that by default, pieces can still
	                "slide" after dropping!)
	D           Discard the current (leftmost) special item
	1..6        Use the current special item on the given player
	T           Open a window for sending a message to other players
	Ctrl-G      Close the text input window (text there is saved for
	                the next time you press T)

The following keys are used for editing text, both in the Partyline screen
and in the text buffer on the Show Fields screen:

	Left        Move cursor left one space
	Right       Move cursor right one space
	Ctrl-A      Move cursor to beginning of line
	Ctrl-E      Move cursor to end of line
	Backspace,  Delete character to left of cursor
	  Delete
	Ctrl-D      Delete character under cursor
	Ctrl-U      Delete entire line
	Enter       Send text (closes input window in Show Fields mode)


Differences from Windows Tetrinet
---------------------------------
Although Linux Tetrinet is designed to play more or less the same as the
original Windows version, there are a few differences; some of these are
simply "missing" features in the Linux version, and some are features I
have introduced into the Linux version because I believe they make the game
more interesting or fun.  Features marked with (*) below can all be
disabled with the -windows command-line option to make playing against
Windows opponents fairer.

  - Messages about specials (i.e. in the Attack/Defense window) are not
    numbered.

  - If a Block Bomb is done on someone who has two "o" (bomb) specials
    right next to each other, one of them will be sent flying rather than
    exploding.  (This is a bug.)

  - Blocks scattered by a Block Bomb will only go to empty spaces on the
    board, rather than appearing on top of already-existing blocks.
    "Holes" will not be scattered. (*)

  - Pieces may go over the top of the board.  In the Windows version, a
    player loses if at any time any square goes off the top of the board.
    In this version, a player only loses if there is no room for the next
    piece to enter the board.

  - Pieces dropped (with the spacebar) can still slide left and right after
    dropping.  Idea from Mark H. Weaver's Netris. (*)  This feature alone
    can be disabled with the -noslide command-line option.  It can also be
    enabled with -slide even if other Linux-specific features are disabled
    with the -windows option.

  - Blockquakes will cause blocks to wrap around the edge of the screen
    rather than disappearing off the edge. (*)

  - Blockquakes will never move rows more than one block to the left or
    right.  (Can anyone determine how quakes work in the Windows version?)

  - Specials collected will always appear at the end of the specials bar
    (in the Windows version, they randomly appear at the beginning or the
    end). (*)


Acknowledgements
----------------
Tetrinet was originally written by St0rmCat, who has asked not to be
contacted with respect to Tetrinet.
